# TAB Summary

This document is a verbose summary of TAB, intended to explain not just what it is (or should be), but why it is being made that way. Its written for folk wanting to develop TAB, either in cooperation with the original development team, or on their own.

To start, let's take a journalistic approach to this and answer five questions:

## Five Questions

### Who

VAL is being developed by a group of people who live in a state of diaspora caused by settler-colonialism, who center Black Liberation and Indigenous Sovereignty.

### What
TAB is a *vernacular information management system*, which means its a way of recording information about events - but with a focus on allowing the recordkeepers to have their own say in what information gets recorded - and how that information gets represented in a "map", also generated by the software.

*(There is an expression in anthropology, "the map is not the territory." It may help to think of TAB as a mapmaking software, where the territory being described are the sociocultural meaning ascribed to the world lived in by its operators.)*

### Why

The pressures of climate and ecological weirding on civilization's transition to late liberalism is likely to exacerbate the material apartheid already felt by those in diaspora. A software which allows people in that position to ascribe their own meaning to objects - material or abstract - through describing the functional relationships of objects as they define them may allow those people to establish means of living which cultivate abundance.

### Where

Due to the pressures of sousveillance, this software is being developed for local use only, with an intention toward being able to build specialized "map" for sharing.

### How
TAB lets you make different *things* (like virtual objects (a goat, a backpack), or abstract information structures (like a TODO list)) by defining their *attributes* and *behaviors*.

It does this by having a collection of models, each of which can be made into a thing by the TAB engine. Each model describes the thing that will be made, but to save time and energy, models can point to their "base" - either one other model, or a list of models - and those will be used in sequence to fill in other attributes for the thing.

For example, an apple model might be:
```json
{
  "name": "apple",
  "base": "food"
}
```

And the food model might be:

```json
{
  "name": "food",
  "description": "This is food."
  "behaviors": ["food"],
  "base": "thing"
}
```

When TAB makes the model into a thing, the following object results:

```js
{
  name: "apple",
  description: "This is food.",
  behaviors: ["food", "thing"],
}
```

Now that it's been made, our apple can behave:

```js
apple.fullName();
// "an apple"
apple.getEaten(tab.makeThing({name: "bunch of worms"}))
// "a bunch of worms eats an apple"
apple.describe();
// "This is an apple that has been eaten by a bunch of worms."
```
